---
sidebar_position: 0
---

# Introduction

This thesis is about coming up with a way to make [TanStack
Query](https://tanstack.com/query) feel more like the [Cloud
Firestore](https://firebase.google.com/products/firestore) client-side
SDK.

The [Cloud Firestore](https://firebase.google.com/products/firestore)
client-side SDK provides an unparalleled interface, in terms of
elegance, for dealing with "real-time" data in the client-side code.
Combining the positive traits of the [Cloud
Firestore](https://firebase.google.com/products/firestore) client-side
SDK with [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query) could
hypothetically solve the most prominent problem I face when developing
with [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query).

The most prominent problem I face when developing with [TanStack
Query](https://tanstack.com/query) is that if I opt-out of revalidation,
then I have to write huge amounts of boilerplate-heavy fragile query
cache updating code which is tightly coupled with both the data model
and the UI of the app. I identify that there's a missing piece here â€”
a need for a solution which can take care of the query cache updating in
a generic and robust way. My hypothesis is that the recipe for that
solution can be derived from the [Cloud
Firestore](https://firebase.google.com/products/firestore) client-side
SDK.

:::info

The source code for the web page edition of this thesis, as well as the
examples and libraries produced as results of this thesis can be found
on GitHub: [https://github.com/DanielGiljam/tanstack-query-with-orbitjs
](https://github.com/DanielGiljam/tanstack-query-with-orbitjs)

:::

## Prerequisites

I assume that the reader is familiar with current web application
development practices, patterns, frameworks, libraries, and tooling, and
that the reader has some experience working with [TanStack
Query](https://tanstack.com/query) or similar libraries, such as [SWR by
Vercel](https://swr.vercel.app/).

## Delimitations

### Delimitation #1

In this thesis, the underlying assumption is that [TanStack
Query](https://tanstack.com/query) is part of our frontend stack, and
that is not going to change.

### Delimitation #2

In this thesis, the underlying assumption is that we cannot use [Cloud
Firestore](https://firebase.google.com/products/firestore) as part of
our stack.

[tq]: https://tanstack.com/query
